Welcome! This is the 6th webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group from Padma Samye Ling, and
today we'll be talking about Chapter 6 of the Venerable Khenpo Rinpoches book "The Buddhist Path",
and the chapter is entitled "Cultivating Bodhichitta".
So first we'll begin with opening prayers, and then we'll continue the discussion.
[Singing]
So today we have three topics we're going to discuss in this chapter "Cultivating Bodhichitta", and
then the first here, basically I'll just summarize the first section of this chapter really quickly
.
The Veneroble Khenpo Rinpoches first say that achieving enlightenment totally depends on one's own
effort, and that the best way to become enlightened is with bodhichitta.
And this bodhichitta has two aspects, this relative aspect of feeling and expressing love and
compassion for all beings, and then the absolute aspect of realizing the empty nature of all
phenomena, oneself and all others.
So the first point summarized in a paragraph on page 33, which is the second paragraph.
The root of bodhichitta is compassion. Compassion is feeling deep in your heart the suffering of
others, and wishing for them to be free from all pain.
The root of compassion is loving kindness, which is the feeling of wanting to replace suffering
with happiness and peace.
Having true love and compassion for everyone is the most precious practice of the Dharma.
Without this, your practice will remain superficial and never be deeply rooted in the true Dharma.
I have a question. So here they say having true love and compassion for everyone is the most
precious practice, and without this, your practice will never be rooted in the true Dharma.
So that's a tall order, right from the beginning, because you have to have love and compassion for
everyone.
And if we're sentient beings, the definition of sentient beings is they don't have love and
compassion for everyone.
You know, I mean, they're self-centered. You know, we have the five poisons, if you're an ordinary
being.
So how do we even start to begin to cultivate loving kindness and compassion for everyone?
That's not where many of us, such as myself, don't naturally just start out there. Any thoughts?
It seems the first thing is that that's kind of like the view to start with at least. And why is
that? Because, I mean, that's how the natural state is, or how the enlightened mind is in that way,
it seems.
And just kind of an underlying thing. You can have this aspiration, but it's kind of a view that's
showing to start out from, like, what is the source and the goal and all of that with the practice.
And there's more to be said, but it just seems like that's a general frame. I mean, that comes to
mind first. I'm sure other people have what it comes to.
And of course, there's people we can relate to who we do love and who we do see suffer.
And it seems like that can be, I don't know, it's like a doorway to all beings. We can think of one
being who we love and don't want to suffer and want to be free of suffering.
And can, like, kind of have that be like a gateway to engaging with our authentic feeling and
thinking about how we wish that for everyone.
And think about how who knows all the ways in which we're related to that one person and how,
really, according to the Buddhist teachings, everyone we've had close relationships with in the
past.
But just in that way, beginning to think about real beings who are in our life and in our world who
we can relate to and just remembering there's more, you know, and keeping our aspiration open and
engaging with that to the best of our abilities.
I think another way, too, is really contemplating the, kind of, just the enlightened qualities of
the Buddhists and, like, seeing, like, thinking about that they can do this.
And, you know, like our teachers tell us in this chapter about how, you know, our bodhicitta at
this time may be small, but it is within our potential to develop this total vast limitless bodhic
itta, boundless bodhicitta, that it is possible.
And we trust that, we trust what our teachers say, we contemplate what these enlightened beings, we
read about their lives and that they've done this and inspire us and, kind of, sort of, that trust
that we can do it.
And then, like you were saying, like, developing that aspiration and wish that we're really strong,
getting stronger, and it seems maybe at that point, maybe they'll lead into this next discussion
about the absolute bodhicitta where we
start understanding that, oh, maybe it's not so limited, you know, there is more space available,
there is more, more possible than I currently think.
And that, kind of, can be our bridge to bringing relative and absolute bodhicitta, too, together.
I think, going off of what you're saying, too, I remember one of the first books I read in Buddhism
was one of the Dalai Lama's books. I think it was called "How to Expand Bodhicitta," but a lot of
the way he wrote the book was tinkering with your view.
He'd give these, kind of, hypotheticals or meditation on, think of someone who you're close to and
then think about, essentially exactly what Lai was saying, thinking about all those shared
qualities, and now expand that out to someone who you feel more neutral towards.
Okay, now that you've practiced that, expand that out to someone who it's not very easy for you to
feel loving towards. You know, you're expanding, expanding, and particularly the way that he goes
about it.
And I think the same, I see a lot of the same thing with all of the great teachers is you start
tinkering with the view, which goes a lot into what I think Amanda also said, you know, you tinker
with the view, and when you're tinkering with the view,
you start to realize that the narrow view that you were holding isn't some absolute thing, it isn't
some permanent thing. It gives that little bit of a gap. That gap is where so much potential is.
I think, although this only applies to people who have met a great teacher, I find that just
thinking of how you feel around the teacher, what the teacher gives all, it's like, okay, that must
be it.
So it's kind of like right there for you, it's kind of like thinking of a parent being that's
saying, well, I think it's great, but it's hard if you don't have a teacher.
I don't think even before what I was saying, think about those people who are compassionate in your
life.
You know, even, I mean, of course, you know, someone who's just nice to you on the street maybe won
't give you the same burst of compassion that, you know, going and seeing Kenpo, but it's a start.
And I think, too, the real basis of the question is so we're all, I mean, sentient beings
experiencing kind of the own difficulties that are kind of always kind of coming back at us.
And I think that really is the springboard, like in that chapter on taking refuge that we went over
, I mean, Amanda said, part of it is we have to recognize these enlightened qualities of the great
masters that are really out of samsara.
They're no longer producing the negative emotions and the grasping that causes all these troubles.
And at the same time, the other side of that is to see, well, what is the cause of these troubles
of samsara?
And it is our own grasping mind and own kind of negative emotions and more limited, narrow ways of
functioning our minds, tightening our heart, closing.
And then we see that in our own experience.
And we see that, okay, I do, there is some difficulty here.
How do I get out?
So that's the first two noble truths.
And like, so we have compassion for ourselves.
There is a problem here.
And it's a genuine problem when we really start to see, this isn't permanent.
I keep doing these things.
They keep causing me trouble.
I don't want to do them as much, but I keep doing them.
And then we need to have compassion.
Okay, is there a way out?
So then there's a little more air in the room, a little more searching for what might help me come
out of this.
And then at the same time, we can identify other people.
Oh, that person is hurting too.
Oh, that person is going through this other thing I went through already.
And then we kind of enlarging this fear like Lodra is saying.
And then keeping in mind this greater view of these great beings that have freely, fully activated
and even in some cases completely realized the beautiful nature of their mind and their heart.
And then we see living examples of these great masters and can directly experience that.
And it uplifts us.
It shows us a way of how compassion is so strong and so capable and so flexible and so grounded
and so functional and so just really so desirable.
It's the most desirable thing in samsara in our desire realm of constantly clean
to try to move towards this love and compassion for ourselves and for others.
But I think the basis is seeing how we don't have that at the same time staying with that larger
view.
But there are these teachings on how my nature is totally pure and so is yours.
And this situation is very workable.
So there's a basis to grow from.
It's kind of just a simple thing about just the word bodhicitta.
You know how it's defined here on these concepts and terms.
But basically the mind of enlightenment.
So I mean just within the word is that the mind has to be, it's the mind being turned to it towards
enlightenment.
So we have to have at first this sense of what is enlightenment, what's so great about it.
So contemplating that first.
So we have like a destination that we understand what we're doing.
And then within that, with is bodhicitta also.
Many, many times Vibhiches define it as the combination of love, compassion and wisdom.
So like in this paragraph we're talking about love and compassion and wisdom.
Like all three really are essential.
So just thinking about the definition of the word is basically what I'm saying.
Just like have that in mind.
That wisdom is an essential component and the wisdom is what takes it to an enlightened perspective
.
Because with love and compassion which is so wonderful and so essential too,
then that's what the point of we're benefiting.
Without the wisdom it stays, it's not a liberative pattern.
This kind of like what makes everything boundless and transcendent.
Big.
That whole boundless quality of like in his commentary on the words of my perfect teacher,
Vibhavacham has this beautiful section on like how bodhicitta begins to increase.
And he says the essence of bodhicitta is the four boundless.
But boundless means includes all sentient beings.
That's the trick.
So he says the four boundless love, compassion, sympathetic joy and then impartiality or equanimity
.
He says even though they have love in the first list as the first one,
in the pith instructions when you should start with impartiality,
you should start with basically just like what you guys were saying too and like what Drachma was
saying.
All beings want to be happy.
We're all the same, we have that common, whatever else we don't have in common,
we do all have in common that we want to be happy.
And then like what Lai was saying,
reflecting on the fact that you've been in all these different kinds of relationships with,
of course this is Buddhism, we're talking about what the Buddha taught which he taught reincarn
ation,
he taught we've been in these relationships with each other forever.
Like we've been enemies, we've been friends, we've been all that to each other
and the common thread is we all want to be happy but we're not.
So recognizing that all the troubles that we are going through, just like you are,
this other person who's your enemy is also going through those troubles.
Even though we tend to think, oh yay, my enemy is going through that trouble, yes.
That's usually the usual reaction but I think something about that,
being able to take that perspective and being able to recognize that humanity
is just like the total foundation building block of equalizing, you know,
has seen that view.
Yeah, it goes into the second topic point.
So I'll do a quick summary of this second section of the chapter really quickly.
Venerable Kembor Rinpoche said that it's only with bodhichitta that we can realize enlightenment.
And without bodhichitta we cannot realize enlightenment.
That bodhichitta is working to free all beings from suffering
and establishing them in enlightenment without any concern for your own welfare.
The root of bodhichitta is compassion and the root of compassion is loving kindness.
And then your love and compassion should include all beings
and of course now these qualities are limited
but with training over time they can become infinite.
And that everything becomes easier as we become more familiar with it
and that bodhichitta is no exception to this, it works in the same way.
As we train in it more and more it becomes easier and easier to recognize and generate.
And then seeing that all beings are equal, we all want happiness and none of us want to suffer.
And then they talk about how the relative aspect of bodhichitta has two subdivisions or two parts.
On the one hand is the wishing or the aspiring relative bodhichitta wanting to help others.
And then there's the actualizing or engaging bodhichitta where we actually work to help others.
We put that aspiration into practice, we perform it.
So then the second topic question or point is...
When you develop the thought of enlightenment you are training your mind
so that you will be able to truly benefit other beings.
Bodhichitta can be understood in two ways as relative and absolute.
Relative bodhichitta is the actual manifestation of loving kindness and compassion for all beings.
Absolute bodhichitta is the realization of emptiness as the profound true nature of reality.
Some people start meditating on love and compassion and then come to an understanding of emptiness.
Other people meditate on emptiness and by that gain an understanding of love and compassion.
Both aspects of bodhichitta are part of the enlightened nature of the mind.
I had a question actually just about that point about how they say that meditating on love and
compassion leads to emptiness and vice versa.
Emptiness leads to love and compassion. Just thought what you all thought about that.
Doesn't that have a great little nugget?
I love that.
I think it's true. I mean you talk to different people. Practitioners does seem that people have
sort of like an entry way
where they're kind of more working with one aspect and then leading to the other
and just wondering if you all put you all out of that point.
In the end of the path we have total balance between two truths.
Relative truth and absolute truth. At that point we'd be a Buddha.
So then all along for all of us in the past, some of us like the relative side a little more,
the forms and expressions, the ways of moving, the things we can kind of engage with
and then others of us like the absolute parts, the open things, the space through which things
happen, the limitlessness of it all.
And so there's constantly events for all of us on the path between that being flexible and
expressing
in the structure and the openness of the structure.
So I think that's just more like saying a statement.
That is the path, like finding that balance and trying to approach it in a playful, more of a dance
way
and to not get locked into either side, only structure, structure, structure, or only open, open,
open.
But really clearly saying that bodhicitta, our own nature, always has these two aspects.
And when they're totally seen to be in perfect harmony, like how the nature is, without being ob
structed by grasping man,
then we're Buddha, we're free of any extreme, one side or the other.
So then just to reiterate that point, it's very curious.
I had a question. It says the root of bodhicitta is compassion.
The front of us says compassion should be more like a dance than a hug. It should be intelligent
compassion.
It shouldn't just be like blindly going into some project because it seems good at the time.
Is that to get intelligent compassion, you just need to cultivate the relative side of compassion
first
and then the wishing, which is just cultivating this love for all beings,
like we're talking about with the parent being or with your teacher.
So do you need that relative wishing before you go into actualizing bodhicitta?
It seems like you'd want to have, you'd want to want to do something in order to then begin to do
it.
More like a meditation side, like you're in meditation and you're really bringing up these thoughts
with compassion and love.
But is it like you need to cultivate that to a level so that it's foundational before you go out
and actualize it?
I, unfortunately, I don't know specifically the context that Pungco Rinpoche is talking in part,
but just a thought that kind of sparked up with it.
I mean, you don't need to, you don't need to put something rigid or something foundational in place
to have compassion.
Compassion is very natural. Why is compassion? That's a little different.
I think that's a bit of what he's talking about, the hug versus the dance.
Because if you just kind of throw yourself out there and say, "I'm going to do all this good for
all these people,"
but you don't know what's actually going to create that level of benefit
and you don't have the stability of a balanced mind to actually be able to follow through.
There you can start problems or make things worse than they were before.
But at that same time, it's not that compassion won't happen if you don't have those things.
It's not the wise compassion.
Maybe it could get too restrained. You're about to do something compassionate,
and then you're like, "Is that wise compassion?"
In some cases that's smart, because think of first aid training.
You're not going to go running into a scene where someone just got hit
because you have to check to see, "Is there a wire there? Why is the person on the floor?"
That's a good requirement.
So on that level, yes, it's good to have that safe level of compassion,
but at the same time, you don't want to over-ridgify yourself
where you're just going to sit there and let the person stay there in the road
because there might be a wire somewhere.
It seems like, too, there's this element of particulars versus generals.
The abstract sense of compassion arising in your own minds
in terms of all sentient beings, or this group of people, or that group of people,
but then when it comes to specific circumstances in a way,
that has to be based on, to some extent, understanding.
The common vernacular term, "idiot compassion," is what I would use it.
I think that means, I don't know, I guess an example,
doing something that seems like a good idea at the time.
He is giving a hungry person bread and then being dependent on him
so that they actually just are worse off.
He's pointing to something really specific,
but it just seems like that basic understanding.
There's an example of the Buddha as one of his first disciples was a young girl.
I think the same Sujata who gave her milk.
Her little brother, he was really sick and she got so frustrated.
He wasn't sick, but he was fussing. He was a baby, really fussy.
She got more and more irritated than she realized that he was sick
and he had this physical problem, maybe something stabbing him.
Then once she understood, of course she had compassion beforehand,
but it was kind of a vague thing,
but once she had that understanding of the particular circumstance,
that's more like wisdom in the land.
Then she really knew exactly how to manifest that compassion.
One example, I guess.
I don't know. Why not just mention we have maybe five minutes
until we're at 30 minutes?
It seemed like part of what you're talking about, Amen,
that balance between aspiring and actualizing.
But it seems like we always, like Rinpoche, say again and again,
we need to always act in accordance to our capabilities,
which is what we're all talking about.
Because we'll never learn to dance if we never try to dance.
We're always going to learn, so I think that's the part.
And then, I don't know, of course in here it goes over the four boundless
and then the six haparamitas, those are very traditional ways of framing that,
you know, the aspirational bodhicitta
and the practices that actually actualize it, you know.
But I don't know.
Just a related point too, I just thought to mention, I remember it struck me,
I heard once that a Salinas karmapa said like our compassion shouldn't be,
should be careful that our compassion doesn't become pity.
And I just, I don't know why, just that it's not like, oh, it's poor
and like I have these, almost like there's a superiority
to this inferior being who's suffering, like just to be careful of that
and just to like kind of check where we're coming from.
Anyway, it's just as a thing.
In the main way, I mean definitely a Salinas Dalai Lama has mentioned the exact same thing,
I think many places, that the way to prevent compassion from becoming pity
is by we're working directly more with a Buddha nature of the other being
and then our own goodness Buddha nature too.
And we start with that as the basis and with this person is 100%
fundamentally essentially wonderful being, really becoming a Buddha
and that we're really more connected with that in the process of as we help them
or as we kind of keep that sense in mind.
And it really does touch more to like the boundlessness of that emotion
or that quality arising in us.
It's our own Buddha nature connecting with their Buddha nature.
And the same with love, like we don't try to hug someone and say, oh, I like you,
I love you because you do everything the way I want it.
Like, just like, oh, I don't have compassion for you because you're so pitiful.
Same way, I don't love you just because you always say yes and suit the way I want it.
Like it's the same way, the wisdom part is to try to do this without the grasping,
without the attachment, more and more flexible and it is really connected towards the view.
It's why like all these practices lead to the view.
Like the six paramitas, like the actualizing bodhicitta,
they lead up to a full transcendent wisdom.
Or like study the three trainings.
We study, then we receive, then we process, then we directly perceive.
And that's the view.
And so we're always trying to lead into that more open, direct experience.
And then like they said in the second topic point,
being in that open, direct experience is the nature.
And that nature has natural qualities of love and compassion arising from it.
That if our experience of our nature is flat, dry, restricted, agitated,
anxious, nervous, it's not the nature.
It's us zoning out or closing in some way.
It should not, it should be juicy and like a kind of little tender and have like a wound.
True Vermice also says they're kind of like a wound.
You're sensitive to the world.
It almost has this bittersweet quality.
We love these beings, so beautiful beings.
And then we're constantly just totally preventing our happiness.
And it's sad.
Like it is this samsara that's totally preventable.
It could be totally free in our being with our nature.
At the same time, we're choosing to not be that way every minute almost.
It's really this bittersweet tension.
It goes into the third point.
Oh, so the third point is, vermice say at the end of the chapter,
the more we practice bodhicitta and cultivate this motivation,
we perform bodhisattva activities and meditate on absolute bodhicitta,
the nature of our mind, and also dedicate our merit for all beings,
then the more we'll feel that others are more important than ourselves.
And we'll work more diligently and joyfully to help them.
And that the Buddha repeatedly prays the qualities of love and compassion
again and again throughout his teachings.
He said one instant of bodhicitta brings enormous benefit,
and then developing bodhicitta as a way of life
leads directly to enlightenment of ourselves and all beings.
So then that third topic point, Ayman, would you read that?
Sure.
Thanks.
To practice bodhicitta, you need to dedicate your efforts freely and openly
without expecting anything in return.
The more you meditate and practice bodhicitta,
the more you feel that others are as dear as yourself,
and eventually their welfare becomes even more important than your own.
It's page 35, first full paragraph.
It's really beautiful.
It goes on to what you were saying, and then on to this point,
that whole Buddha nature aspect of everyone's not just ignorant sentient beings.
That's just a label.
From one perspective, everyone is a potential Buddha,
who has all these qualities that they themselves don't see.
But anyway, I just thought something related to that point.
That's why I think people respond so powerfully sometimes
to these teachers, these wisdom beings,
because maybe they're not used to being treated with so much respect.
Maybe they don't see themselves as something worthy of any kind of respect.
But then you get around these teachers,
and they see what you see, your image,
but they also see, it's like they talk right to you,
your deep meaning, and it helps you bring that up,
and it helps that shine.
Creating those natural conditions.
This seems like our Buddha nature.
It's an inherent nature of ourselves and all beings.
And just that aspect of that beautiful view of how it's completely empty
of any substantially existing inherent.
Something we can find is that open, empty nature.
But then, inseparable from that is nothing but 100% arising compassion and wisdom.
Just as that view and integrating that into that.
And then just how everyone thrives.
Even if someone is given an ounce of respect or a chance to be heard,
we really kind of bring out those natural qualities and goodness qualities and beings.
I mean, of course it's multiferous.
I thought too we had maybe about five minutes to kind of wrap things up.
So maybe just as we talk, if we kind of bring it all together.
I have one question. We do next time on Bodhicitta too.
Anyway, we don't have to answer it.
It's like such a foundational, important topic that it's just like...
You're saying how many definitions does it have in this topic?
Yeah, what's that?
Kuntzang called it and he said there's like 22 different ways
that the Prabhupāramīta says Bodhicitta is 22 or 24 different things.
Other people say 80 and so it's very nice.
And it's beautiful we have these teachings that are distilled in such essential points
so that we can really practice them and also really get at the heart of them.
These great masters have passed along these lineage instructions
and realized them in their own personal experience.
I mean, at the same time, there's so many nuances just like life,
just like all this interdependent phenomenon.
There's so much unique tendrils or like these little webs of interconnected nuance
that they're so rich to really lean into and become more familiar with
and really appreciate more, be more thorough, be more complete.
And within that larger view, there's so much nuance.
And at the same time, we have these treasure instructions
of how to really distill the essence
and then we can spread into the detail and really like fill out like our experience
and really become more, you know, less idiot, compassion,
and more really full bodied, like full loving wisdom beings.
I mean, to really have a view and really fill it in.
That sentence we were talking about before is so beautiful.
Again, you know how some people start meditating on the love of compassion
and come into the understanding.
And some people meditate on that understanding of emptiness
and move into the love of compassion.
You know, coming back to what you were saying, you know,
you can find that essence and then you can see the detail
and you can just see how the whole thing is still encompassed within that enlightened mind.
I think even another way of saying it, which is just there's so many ways of saying it
because, you know, we talk relative absolute.
You can say it in terms of like devotion and compassion in a sense too,
thinking like, you know, contemplating, like we were talking about earlier,
contemplating the qualities of enlightenment is basically like devotion in a way.
You know, thinking about, oh, you know, my teacher has all these incredible qualities
and I like aspire to be like that or to develop those qualities.
And that's the devotion opening, you know, kind of the getting,
touching onto that absolute aspect.
And then likewise, though, I mean, so that's one gateway,
one entry way to begin.
And, you know, another way to begin would be to just feel love and compassion
and develop that and thinking, you know, more about sentient beings
and like those who wish to be happy, all beings wish to be happy and contemplate.
And they both, you can see in that way, they lead one, they lead to each other, really.
It's kind of just really beautiful like that.
I thought the one really important point, which we all know is like,
we've heard so many times from Rinpoche's and everybody,
like his woman, this dude, Rinpoche, he said,
"There's not, you shouldn't do even a single mani.
If you do even a single mani recitation or any kind of practice at all,
refuge, bodhicitta, and then dedicate the merit from that."
He said, "Even the most smallest practice."
So just to bring it like, how bodhicitta, this is Mahayana, you know,
this is Vajrayana, it's the total root, it's the complete foundation.
And if we can maintain that motivation and intention
and try to follow through with our practice that way, we won't,
we'll never get off the path.
So I think it's just nice to just remember that refuge in the beginning
with that motivation of bodhicitta, and as Holiness, he even said that,
even a single mani, all mani from the home, you should dedicate that merit
and you should do it for the intention of bodhicitta for all beings.
It's very beautiful.
Also in that main practice, with this large, more expansive view
of the flexible, illusory, playful nature, like always that is there too.
The dedication is open, the refuge of bodhicitta dreamlike,
and so it's always within this absolute bodhicitta as well.
So that's really, it's so special, thank you.
Yeah, they say that's in this definition, just that absolute bodhicitta recognizes
that all beings are primordially enlightened.
There is no liberator, no deluded beings, and no act of liberation,
since nothing ever moves from the absolute sphere of the Dharma Dantu.
So just like what you're saying, keeping that in mind.
So to recognize that nature is the great absolute bodhicitta.
It's really amazing.
And then Kaverpoche says really very simple style, think globally, act locally.
Big view, detailed, loving, simple steps, compassion.
To be continued.
Always.
[Singing]
[Singing continues]
By this merit, may all obtain omniscience.
May it defeat the enemy wrongdoing.
From the stormy waves of earth, old age, sickness and death.
From the ocean of samsara, may I free all beings.
The precious bodhicitta, and those without it, may it be generated.
And those who have it, may it never diminish, but always continue increasing.